# VM Summit #4 Meeting Notes

Thank you NodeSource for hosting the VM Summit.

* FFI Update – Ali
  * No progress since last time, resource issues
  * Still interest, makes sense for other reasons as well for V8 team
  * FFI- vm 
    * A tool for creating native modules that primarily bind C libraries to JS dynamically generates bindings to C functions.  Efficient for wrapping existing c functions
    * Complementary to N-API which is needed for other use cases.
    * The big impetus for NAPI was native module developers, so FFI is important to us because it helps them
    * Does move to turbo fan/ignition affect FFI as it used to be completely jitted but not its interpreted to start.  Ali - no, jit would still be used to generate the glue.
  * Dshaw: suggesting that maybe a broader work group (google + outside google) could help make progress.
  * Discussion around starting by defining a spec, that would allow a generator to N-API, then for migration when direct vm support is available.
  * Mozilla has ‘ctypes’ which is not a recommended example.
  * What is the primary V8 use case for this?
    * Node
    * WebAssembly could benefit from this, but it is not immediately a priority for them
  * Next steps
    * Setup repo … done! https://github.com/nodejs/ffi (initial nodejs/ffi team created)
    * Setup regular meeting
    * Collect use cases - https://github.com/nodejs/ffi/issues/1
* N-API Update – Michael & Arunesh
  * Adoption efforts
    * https://github.com/nodejs/abi-stable-node/issues/246
    * https://github.com/nodejs/abi-stable-node/issues/245
    * Awareness
      * Node Summit
      * Node Interactive
      * NodeConfEU
  * Exit experimental status 
    * By end of August?
    * Remove enabling flag? (barrier to use) Consensus in room to remove the flag.. Should get a PR soon for this
    * No process warning either?
    * What is the experimental exit criteria?
      * Need tracking issue with clarifications of criteria
      * Write up on the prebuilt toolchain with n-api
      * Multiple implementations
        * 2 or more VM implementations
        * 2 or more modules that are NPM installable with pre-builds and all unit tests passing
        * Both modules used in real world use cases on at least one VM
        * A PoC that shows this working that exercising all the code paths
      * Enable N-API for async_hooks (async_hooks expert needed)
        * There is a subset of async_hooks that napi and async_hooks needs to agree to for stability
        * We don’t want to tie this to NAPI’s non-experimental status, this is not an exit criteria for NAPI
        * We want to continue working on this, but not going to pull it into NAPI until its stable
      * Next steps
        * Refine this criteria in a GH issue
        * Opened https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/14532
        * Find two module owners and get buy in
          * Matteo - https://github.com/mcollina/native-hdr-histogram will do an experimental release
          * Work in issue #13254 to Identify the intersection of NAPI and async_hooks stability, which parts of the async_hooks are important to NAPI’s stability
    * Take up a case study for Migrating NAN modules to N-API
    * NAN Evolution
 
* JerryScript use of N-API – Gabriel
  * https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1fE8g-r0Y7Xzin3LRn1fV6YBCFS5IcySjyRcARMSSadE/edit#slide=id.p3

* VM Diversity
  * Experiment update: N-API port of Core modules  - Jason
    * Experiment conducted porting node_file.cc to N-API successful but there's a lot more to do.
    * Need to expand N-API V8 API coverage to account for core uses. Should those new N-API bits be public?
    * Need to do performance testing. This is difficult because some shimming is required. Won't have a complete picture of performance until the full migration is done
    * Next: convert something more extensive, like StreamBase and sockets.
    * Goal: eventually, Node.js core itself should only be using N-API for it's own interactions with the VM
* Compliance suite – Myles
  * We did not get to this in detail, tho it was discussed briefly. Will be picking this item up on the next VM summit.
 
## Other topics – if there is time and interest

We did not get to these topics...

* Inspector protocol
* Improving problem determination – debugging / tracing
* iOS and mobile scenario for Node
* Matteo’s research on Turbofan
* Workers (https://github.com/nodejs/worker)

-----

# Attendees:

* Ali Sheikh (Google)
* Anil Kumar (Intel)
* Arunesh Chandra (Microsoft) 
* Boaz Sender (Bocoup)
* Dan Shaw 
* Gabriel Schulhof (Intel)
* Hitesh Kanwathirtha (Microsoft)
* James Snell (nearForm)
* Jason Ginchereau (Microsoft)
* Joe Doyle (NodeSource)
* Justin Beckwith (Google)
* Mark Marron (Microsoft)
* Matt Hargett
* Matteo Collina (nearForm)
* Michael Dawson (IBM)
* Refael Ackermann
* Rod Vagg (NodeSource)
* Shu-yu (Mozilla)
* Thomas Nattestad (Google) 
